In the last two lectures,
I discussed how bitcoin
reaches distributed consensus.
Nodes in a distributed
network are chosen
at random in a thought
experiment to propose a block.
Nodes that propose
a block receive
bitcoins as a block reward.
More precisely, they get to
choose an address
to which to send
the bitcoins because the
nodes are not addresses.
If the block is accepted by
subsequent nodes and becomes
part of the consensus,
the chosen address gets
to keep the bitcoins.
This is a brilliant scheme
for incentivizing
honest behavior,
but it does require
randomization,
otherwise one node could
potentially take over.
That works in
a thought experiment,
but how can we make it work
in the physical world?
The answer is mining.
Well, bitcoin mining is
a resource-intensive
activity that
results in the discovery
of new coins.
Thus the analogy to
precious metals implicit
in the word mining.
So here's how it works.
Nodes compete to have a chance
to propose the next block,
they succeed if they
are the first to
solve what is called
a hash puzzle,
the hash puzzle is essentially
a cryptographic puzzle.
Puzzle-friendliness,
which if you recall,
is a property of
the hash function,
implies that such puzzles
can be found.
Now, the only way to solve
the cryptographic puzzle is
through trial and error,
lots and lots of trial and error,
think perhaps of hacking into
a system by choosing
passwords at random.
The greater the computing
power of the node,
the more likely it is
to be able to solve
the hash puzzle because the
faster it can do
this trial and error.
When it solves the hash puzzle,
it proposes the block,
with the potential to receive
the block reward if
the block is accepted.
Now, the block reward means
it has mined new bitcoins.
Now, here's something
that's important,
all nodes can verify
that a given node has
solved the puzzle,
so the system is
truly decentralized.
Proof of work is, therefore,
the solving of
a hash puzzle for which
the node is rewarded by being
able to propose a block,
but that may not be
much of a reward,
the main reward, is
the block reward which
is given in bitcoins.
There's also transaction costs
reward that I'll discuss later.
So notice that the proof of work
creates the randomness
that we were missing.
For two competing
nodes, let's say,
with roughly equal
processing power,
there is simply no way to predict
which node will solve
the puzzle first,
and get to propose its block.
Does this mean that block
selection is random?
Well, if by random you
mean unpredictable?
Then yes.
Well, because the only way to
predict which of
the competing nodes will
win is by having
as much computing power
as the two nodes combined.
Because the answer of
which one solves
the puzzle first can
only be done by actually
solving the puzzle first.
That means that to us which
competing node will win is
it's unpredictable
and hence random.
Now, if by random you
mean non-deterministic?
Then no.
Because given a set of
initial conditions of
the competing nodes,
the process of which one gets
to win is completely
deterministic.
What this illustrates is
actually a deep point about
randomness that
a process can both
be deterministic and random,
Henri Poincare made this point
in the 19th century,
and it's pretty useful
for our purposes here.
Block rewards are
the only way within
the bitcoin reference software
for new coins to be mined.
However, even block
rewards are limited.
For every 210,000 blocks,
the block reward is cut in half
because the blocks are created
at a deterministic rate,
this occurs approximately
every four years.
So because the block reward
is cut in half,
there is an exponential rate of
decay in the growth
rate of blocks.
It means that the total number of
bitcoins will converge
to 21 million.
So here's a graph that shows
the total bitcoins as
a function of the year
and so we've passed
the first inflection point.
So the creation of new bitcoins
allows the currency to be in
limited supply at the beginning
and then the supply to
grow and then to converge
to a fixed amount.
By the way, this does not
imply that bitcoin is subject to
deflationary pressures as
claimed by Nouriel Roubini,
even if the economy grows,
we can just buy more things
with the current bitcoins.
But what it does imply is that
the bitcoin supply
cannot be manipulated.
Now, the potential
rewards to mining
go beyond the receipt
of bitcoins.
They also include the receipt of
something called a
transaction fee.
The node proposes transactions
in which the value of
the bitcoins coming in exceed
the value of
the bitcoins going out.
The remainder get to be paid
to an address of the
nodes' choosing.
So what the transactions
fees do is they
ensure continuing incentives
for trade in bitcoin.
So here's a graph of
the transaction fees,
fees skyrocket in late 2017,
but are now back to
being negligible.
So to summarize,
proof-of-work incentivizes
behavior through block reward.
It creates randomization
by making nodes
compete as to be the first
to solve a hash puzzle.
Randomization that was only among
nodes with the greatest
computing power.
Proof of work builds
in currency creation
and then ensure stabilization,
transaction fees can then step
into incentivize honest trading.
Now, there are
drawbacks to proof of
work that will be discussed
in the next lecture.